## Never Graduate

This week was the last week of my batch at the [Recurse Center](https://www.recurse.com/) so I decided it was time for some introspection and a look back.  

The best description I have for RC is a programming retreat where one has the time, space, and resources to become a better programmer - whatever that means for them. In their [manual](https://www.recurse.com/manual#sec-environment), RC jokingly claims it’s a socially acceptable alternative to telling your friends and family you’re going to quit your job to sit at home and program for three months. I disagree, and not least of which because I don’t think my family was any more reassured when I described RC to them than they would have been if I’d told them I was just going to hang out for a while.  
  
RC is more than just a socially acceptable way to do your own thing for three months. RC provides a(n actually physical) place where you’re never the smartest person in the room, but where no one will make you feel like an ass about that. A lot of work goes into making sure you never feel bad about asking questions. The social rules play a part in that, but so does the caliber of accepted recursers and residents. I haven’t met a single person at RC, current batch or alumni, who was anywhere short of a great person who cares about other people. At RC, everyone is excited to share their relative expertise.  
  
Knowing that makes it easier to put yourself out there. The most obvious example of this is Thursday presentations. This is a low-pressure, weekly opportunity to practice public speaking and showcase what you’ve been working on. Everybody claps and _no one is allowed to ask questions_ during your allotted 5 minutes. If anybody has any comments about your presentation, they’re encouraged to find you afterwards, when you can discuss in a much more forgiving (read: less publicly humiliating) setting. Removing the fear of failure and embarrassment enables you to look back at your experience and critique your performance without the typical sense of dread associated with public speaking.  
  
However, though RC was great, I also struggled a lot with not feeling productive during my batch. The first day was a whirlwind, and it took me some time to get used to the space. The first few weeks, in between some operating system setup issues and a bad cold, it felt like I lacked strong direction. I was trying to learn too much, too new, all at once, and felt frustrated that I didn’t have anything to show for what I’d learned. I was concerned that maybe I _hadn’t_ learned. Thursday presentations became a display of other recursers succeeding where I wasn’t - even when they were presenting on something I already felt comfortable with! It’s funny how easy it is to diminish your accomplishments once they’re, you know, accomplished. (¬_¬)  
  
I eventually realized how easy it is to be unkind to yourself, even when you think you’re being perfectly fair. I figured out how to let go of a project when appropriate, [thanks to this blog post (from a member of my batch!!!)](http://gwendolyn.io/let-your-side-project-backlog-spark-joy/) and to reflect on my accomplishments and skillset [thanks to this one](https://medium.com/@alecbarrett/the-relative-expert-412ab0828a68). I decided to shift gears into working on smaller or easier projects _as long as I was coding_. I did more pair programming, and established a better balance for participating (and giving) workshops vs actual coding.  
  
In hindsight, I should have leaned more on all of the other recursers in my batch. They’re a great source of knowledge and support, and pair-programming is a great way to remind yourself of the things you know that other people don’t.  
  
I think coming to RC right after graduation was probably a mistake for me. I wasn’t really sure what I wanted to do with my freshly acquired skillset and I thought that RC would be the perfect opportunity to explore the various fields I’ve always kind of wanted to try. That led to a decent bit of stalling, and while I did eventually figure out a learning itinerary of sorts, I expect that coming into RC with an unambiguous direction would be a much more productive experience.   
  
I look forward to coming back at some point later in my career, when I’m inspired to go into a deep-dive. Being at RC has been an overall really positive experience. It feels like I’ve been here forever (which feels better when I think about all of the things I know now that I didn’t know how to do three months ago!) I’ve learned a lot, even if it wasn’t in the ways that I expected to, and I’ve met some wonderful people. Shout out to all of them.   
  
If you’re interested in applying to the Recurse Center, feel free to reach out. I enthusiastically recommend it to anyone who’s trying to become a better programmer - again, whatever that means to you - and I’m happy to talk more about what it was like. Cheers!
